---
title: Setting up marley
categories:
- ruby
- git
- blogging
layout: post
---

we're jamming... and i hope you like jamming too.

I've been meaning to set up a blog for quite a while now, but never actually
got round to it. Now that everyone is crying "[blogs are
dead](http://casesblog.blogspot.com/2009/01/is-blogging-dead-or-dying-will-twitter.html)",
it seems to be an odd choice.  But I don't believe blogging is dead, it's more
the case that the whole blog-ecosystem is fed by twitter (people tweeting links
to blog posts and so on).

The other problem was that most blogging engines I've tried so far (at least
the hackable ones, i.e. written in ruby) sucked, were bloated, or both. Then I
came across [marley](http://github.com/karmi/marley), a minimalist blog engine
operating only on flat files.  Just the idea of using flat files as article
storage format is not new (Rael Dornfest did it with
[bloxsom](http://www.blosxom.com/) almost 10 years ago), but the combination
with a modern version control system such as git makes it very interesting. All
content is stored in a version controlled format, publishing your content is
just a matter of pushing to the server, given you've installed the correct
commit hooks.

Then it's written using [sinatra](http://www.sinatrarb.com/), a neat micro web
framework which is currently getting used a lot for all those mini web apps
which don't need a big framework like rails or merb.

The idea of marley is that you fork the codebase on github and then
customise/hack your own blog. So instead of editing templates inside the blog
application you just modify the templates in place. And because you've forked
from github you'll be able to pull in updates to marley later. That is at least
the theory.

I've decided to have code + blog articles all in on repo so I can deploy it all
in one single operation. With some scripting it is even possible to restart the
blog engine with a simple "git push", see
[post-receive.rb](http://gist.github.com/69304) for the details (I'm using
apache2+passenger). Code is data, data is code... or how was that again?
